[Music]
Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. Today, we want to
connect integers with other parts of mathematics,
and we want to look towards establishing an
anti-particle/particle duality across a wide
area of mathematics. So far, we have integers
consisting of natural numbers and negative
numbers. This is a very nice closed system with
the operations of addition, multiplication,
and subtraction. I remind you that we have
examples like this: here is 3 + (-5) = -2;
here is -2 * -3 = 6; here is 3 - 4, and here's how
we do that. The minus sign is really the same as
adding -1 times this thing here, so there's
the -1, and when we multiply all of these
anti-marks by marks, we get a bunch of anti-marks,
and then when we add, we get -1 as we should.
Implicit here is this notion of
negation where -n is, by definition,
-1 * n. I remind you that this is -1. So,
there's the framework of natural numbers and
negative numbers together forming integers.
But we want to go further than that now.
So, I'd like to frame the discussion by asking
this question: What are numbers good for? Well,
one good answer is that they are for counting the
size of a collection or an M-set. For example,
here is an M-set contained in these brackets,
and there are several objects inside the M-set,
and they are of different kinds in this example.
Suppose we're interested in asking the question
of how big that M-set is. Well, what we can
do is replace the objects inside the M-set
with single marks. So whenever there's
an identifiable object like that list,
we make a mark. There's another object—we make a
mark. There's another object, which happens to be
just a natural number—we make a mark. Another
mark for that one, and another mark for this
little ordered set. Altogether, we've made these
five marks for the five objects inside here. What
we've done is we've simplified this thing—we've
replaced this original M-set with a much simpler
one where every single object was just replaced
with our basic mark. And then that is, in fact,
the answer to our question: that M-set of
marks is then the answer. It's the number,
which is the size of the original
M-set, which we recognize as five.
So, in order for this to work, we really do
require that the elements of the M-set that
we're considering are very clearly, precisely
defined objects. We have to be able to identify
them and recognize them as things that we're
already familiar with. For example, if we asked
ourselves what's the size of this M-set here,
we would be in a very different situation. So,
this looks like an M-set because there are these
square brackets, but when we actually look inside,
we see things that we're not familiar with—at
least not in a kind of mathematical context.
Here is an English word, another English
word, here’s something that looks like an
equation even though it's not really a correct
equation, here is some conglomeration of symbols
that we have no idea what that means, and here
is something that looks vaguely arithmetical,
although it's certainly not familiar to us. Are we
in a position to say what the size of this M-set
is? No. We regard this as an ambiguous question.
This is not a proper question because the M-set
that we're given is not a proper M-set from our
point of view. We are not allowed to just make
up M-sets by choosing random symbols, objects,
or words that have not already been established
in a mathematical context. We're not allowed
to do that in our formulation of things now.
The second thing that numbers are good for is kind
of an ordinal use, that of describing the position
in a list. For example, here is a list L. You can
see it's a list because it has square brackets
and there are commas separating the elements, so
there's definitely an order to the elements here,
but repetitions are allowed. In this list,
the element (2, 1, 3), which is itself a list,
is the third element of this list. There’s
the first element, the second element,
the third element. So, we can use the number
three in this context. It's a different usage
of the word "three"—it's not counting three
things, really, it's specifying the third
position in a list. We're not going to say much
more about this because I want to move on to
this third usage of numbers, which is separate
from counting and separate from specifying the
order or position in a list. This other role
that numbers can play is to multiply things,
to scale things, or in our data structure
point of view, to multiply an M-set.
For example, here’s an M-set A consisting
of (4, 3) and (3). Then we know we can,
say, create A + A—we can add that M-set to
itself. What you get is (4, 4, 3, 3, 3, 3),
and it makes sense to allow ourselves to write
this as 2A or 2 * A. Notice that we're now using
a number here. This number is somehow combining
with this M-set to give us another M-set. This
is a case of scaling—we're using the number 2 to
scale the M-set A. But what actually does that
mean? What precisely are we doing when we multiply
an M-set by a number? We need to define this.
So, if n is, say, an integer, and A is an M-set,
we would like to have a precise definition of
what n * A actually is. The way I want you
to think about this is as an extension of
something that we've already used before. What
we're going to do is think about our basic mark,
which is this essential ingredient that populates
our numbers, and we want to think about how we're
going to multiply our mark by, well, anything
else, really. So, let's just think about this.
This heart here represents some mathematical
object, some unspecified mathematical object
at this point. It might be a mathematical object
that we've already created, like a list, a set,
an ordered set, or a multiset of lists, something
like that, or it might represent something that we
are going to discuss sometime in the future. But
in any case, we want this general orientation:
that if we have our mark and we're going to
multiply the mark by this object (heart),
what we should get is heart. So,
the mark times heart equals heart.
First of all, note that this is consistent with
our basic multiplication table. We started out
with just these three kind of really basic
ingredients: our mark, the anti-mark,
and emptiness. We had this multiplication table
that told us how these various things multiply,
so that mark times mark was mark, mark times
empty was empty, and mark times anti-mark was
anti-mark. Notice that those rules are consistent
with this. If you replace the heart with a mark,
you get a mark. If you replace the
heart with emptiness, which, okay,
is another possibility, then you get
emptiness. If you replace the heart
with an anti-mark, you do indeed get
an anti-mark on the right-hand side.
Okay, so that's going to be our basic
rule, but we are going to apply it in
the context of M-set multiplications. So,
it's not that we're going to see this as
an equation that occurs in isolation—this
will always be occurring in the context of
M-set multiplication. So, this is kind
of an ingredient in a larger picture.
We've seen this before in the context of just
ordinary multiplication because if we multiply
the natural number 3 by the natural number 4,
what we're doing is basically multiplying each
of the ingredient objects here with each one of
the individual objects here. So, we have a mark
times a mark equals a mark, and so on. We do each
of the various possibilities, so we're basically
using that property: that this mark times this
object is that object, sort of a special case.
Similarly here, if we have, say, 3 * -2, well,
we're taking the mark times anti-mark is the
anti-mark, and then this mark times the same
anti-mark is that next anti-mark, and this one
times that anti-mark is that anti-mark. It's
useful here to maybe go through these ones
first. Let me illustrate that here with this
multiplication. So, here is the number 3,
and here now is not a number but actually
another M-set whose elements are, in fact,
singletons or M-sets or lists of single numbers.
So, what's the rule of how we multiply this set,
this M-set, by this M-set? Well, we have to
multiply each of the ingredients here by each
of the ingredients here. So, let's start with this
mark times the singleton 4—that's going to be,
according to our basic rule, the singleton
4. Then let's multiply this next mark also
by that same singleton 4—we get another
singleton 4. Then the next mark by that
same singleton 4—we get another singleton
4. So, we multiply each one of those
by that one there. Then we have to go through
the same three, all multiplying this one,
which gives us another 4, another three singleton
4s, and then we have to multiply each of these
by that last singleton 0. So, we get (0,
0, 0), and that's the end there. Alright,
so we basically use the same rule that inside the
multisets, this mark times anything is anything.
Okay, so this makes a lot of sense because now we
can go back to, say, our algebra of vexels, and we
can see that what we naturally want to do actually
makes legal sense now. For example, suppose we
have the vector or the vexel V, which is singleton
0, singleton 4, or singleton 4. Now, this is
now—you can express this in terms of a freeze or
a sort of one-dimensional vector as (1), (0), (0),
(0), (2). So, this M-set would correspond to this
sort of vector object, and I've put a little extra
square here to identify that that's the zero
place, that's the index corresponding to zero.
Suppose we wanted to expand this vector so we
could write it as a sum of this M-set plus this
M-set. And this is an M-set consisting of these
two singleton 4s. We could write that as the
number 2 times the M-set consisting of a singleton
4 because if we multiply this M-set by this M-set,
we're going to get two copies of the singleton
4, and what we're getting here is just this thing
here. It has another name for it—that's e0, this
is what we call e4, and so what we're getting is
e0 + 2e4. So, what we before sort of just casually
wrote down—e0 + 2e4—now we're being precise. We're
saying, ah, that's a number, that's an M-set. The
product of this number times this M-set is exactly
given by our basic rule: that mark times heart
equals heart. We're almost adopting a computer
science orientation here, and it's almost like
we've got these fundamental objects that we're
encoding into our program, and we have to tell our
computer how to do all possible operations. So,
we've already defined how to do the various
operations of numbers with themselves,
but if we want numbers to interact with
M-sets, then we have to tell our computer
what exactly it means to multiply a number
by an M-set, and that's just what we've done.
So, here’s another example involving maxwells.
Here’s a maxwell M involving these five pixels,
and we can rewrite that, if we want to, as the
M-set consisting of these two pixels plus the
M-set consisting of these three pixels. Then this
one here can be written as the number 2 times the
M-set consisting of the single pixel (-1, -2),
and this can be written as the number 3 times
the M-set consisting of the singleton pixel
(0, 0). So, the number here is multiplying
the ingredients of the M-set, by this case,
three. So, we can go from this one to this one,
and our convention is that this M-set consisting
of a singleton pixel (-1, -2) can be expressed as
e_-1,-2, and this one here is e_0,0. So, the whole
thing can be written as 2 * e_-1,-2 + 3 * e_0,0,
and we have now a precise meaning as to what the
two and the three mean. And we're in a position
now to extend this to other objects. As long as we
have M-sets, then we know how to multiply M-sets
now by natural numbers. So far, actually, we've
only discussed what happens when we multiply an
object by our mark. Well, we want to then extend
this to also being able to multiply M-sets,
not just by natural numbers involving marks,
but also perhaps by the empty M-set. For that,
we need a rule that tells us how to multiply
an arbitrary object—let's say heart again—by
nothing. Here's our rule: that
nothing times heart equals nothing.
This is also consistent with our multiplication
table. If you look at our multiplication table
with the row that had nothing corresponding,
then nothing times the mark was nothing,
nothing times nothing was nothing, and nothing
times the anti-mark was also nothing. So,
whenever you multiply something with nothing,
you get nothing. This is what this rule encodes.
So now we're in a position to multiply also by
the empty M-set, or in other words, zero. Now
we can actually talk about laws of arithmetic when
we're multiplying natural numbers and M-sets. So,
for example, if n and m are natural numbers
and capital A and capital B are M-sets,
then the first rule tells us that if we
multiply, say, A by m and then multiply by n,
the effect is to multiply by n * m. The
second rule is a kind of distributive law:
that (n + m) * A is the same as n * A + m * A,
and we'll agree that the brackets here are not
really needed. So, we'll just rewrite this like
this. So, this means n * A + m * A. And there's a
distributive property the other way around because
we can also add M-sets, so n * (A + B) is the same
as n * A + n * B. And finally, a rule concerning
our empty M-set, which is our natural number zero:
0 * A is zero. You multiply an M-set A by
the number zero, you're going to get the
empty M-set again, which is still zero. So, the
empty M-set is zero—that's our name for it. So,
these are laws of arithmetic between natural
numbers and M-sets. It’s pretty easy to see,
you can convince yourself of them, maybe a little
bit unfamiliar laws because maybe we're not used
to multiplying numbers by M-sets too often, but
they're actually quite foundational little laws.
Now, I'd like you to take special note of the
fact that we haven't multiplied sets, lists,
or ordered sets by numbers—we've just defined
the product of a number with an M-set. So,
there's something special about M-sets, which I
guess is one of the little themes that we've been
discussing in the last few dozen videos. M-sets
are kind of special, and they are particularly
well-suited for arithmetic, and that's why we're
using them to build up arithmetic. But okay,
they're involved arithmetically in
more complicated, interesting ways.
So, what about extending numbers as multipliers
to integers? Okay, so we can multiply an M-set
by 3 or by zero. What does it mean to multiply
an M-set by -4? That's an interesting question,
and it's a useful question because
we want to do that. For example,
suppose we're interested in the vexel e0 - 3e1 +
2e3, which we might write as a vector (1, -3, 0,
2). Okay, that's a very common, natural kind
of vector to consider. But what does that -3
mean? Because we're interpreting these things
as multiplicities of essentially singletons,
right? This is how many singleton zeros there
are, this is how many singleton threes there
are. That means this must somehow mean or say
something about the number of singleton ones
there are. There's -3 singleton ones in
this M-set. What does that mean exactly?
We have to now extend our understanding of
multiplying numbers and sets to having our
numbers be integers. And it's at this stage
that we're going to have to think more deeply
about this particle/antiparticle duality and
really extend it in a broad new way to be
much more extensive than just mark/anti-mark.
So, we're going to have to really incorporate
anti-particle/particle duality much more broadly
in mathematics. That's what we're going to do in
our next video. Hope you'll join me for that.
I'm Norman Wildberger, thanks for listening.
[Music]